README.md, before:

# Go Stats Calculator

A robust, command-line tool written in Go to compute a comprehensive set of descriptive statistics from a list of numbers. It can read data from a file or directly from standard input, making it a flexible utility for data analysis in any shell environment.

## Overview

This program takes a simple, newline-delimited list of numbers (integers or floats) and calculates key statistical properties, including measures of central tendency (mean, median, mode), measures of spread (standard deviation, variance, IQR), and the shape of the distribution (skewness). It also identifies outliers based on the interquartile range method.

## Disclaimer

This program was vibe-coded by `Gemini 2.5` Pro and `Opus 4.5`. As such, the author can't be held responsible for incorrect calculations. Please verify the results for any critical applications.

## Features

The calculator computes the following statistics:

-   **Count**: Total number of valid data points.
-   **Min / Max**: The minimum and maximum values in the dataset.
-   **Mean**: The arithmetic average.
-   **Median (p50)**: The 50th percentile, or the middle value of the dataset.
-   **Mode**: The value(s) that appear most frequently.
-   **Standard Deviation**: A measure of the amount of variation or dispersion.
-   **Variance**: The square of the standard deviation.
-   **Quartiles (Q1, Q3)**: The 25th (p25) and 75th (p75) percentiles.
-   **Percentiles (p95, p99)**: The 95th and 99th percentiles, useful for understanding tail distributions.
-   **Interquartile Range (IQR)**: The range between the first and third quartiles (Q3 - Q1).
-   **Skewness**: A formal measure of the asymmetry of the data distribution.
-   **Outliers**: Data points identified as abnormally distant from other values.

All numeric output uses full decimal notation (no scientific notation) with trailing zeros trimmed for readability.

## Installation

### Homebrew (MacOS / Linux):

* `brew tap jftuga/homebrew-tap; brew update; brew install jftuga/tap/stats`

### Source

* Clone the repository and build:
    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/jftuga/go-stats-calculator.git
    cd go-stats-calculator
    go build -ldflags="-s -w" -o stats stats.go
    ```

## Usage

The program can be run in two ways: by providing a filename as a command-line argument or by piping data into it. The program automatically detects piped input, so the `-` argument is optional.

### 1. Read from a File

Provide the path to a file containing numbers, one per line.

**Syntax:**
```bash
./stats <filename>
```

**Example:**
```bash
./stats data.txt
```

### 2. Read from Standard Input (stdin)

Pipe data from other commands directly into the program. The program automatically detects piped input, so no special argument is needed. You can optionally use the `-` argument for explicit stdin reading.

**Syntax:**
```bash
<command> | ./stats
```

**Examples:**
```bash
# Pipe the contents of a file
cat data.txt | ./stats

# Pipe output from another command (e.g., extracting a column from a CSV)
awk -F',' '{print $3}' metrics.csv | ./stats

# Explicit stdin reading (also works)
cat data.txt | ./stats -

# Manually enter numbers (press Ctrl+D when finished)
./stats -
10
20
30
^D
```

## Example

Given a file named `sample_data.txt` with the following content:

**`sample_data.txt`**
```
14.52
16.81
13.99
15.05
17.33
21.40
15.05
18.92
24.78
19.61
38.95
22.13
16.42
35.88
20.11
```

Running the command `./stats sample_data.txt` will produce the following output:

```
--- Descriptive Statistics ---
Count:          15
Sum:            310.95
Min:            13.99
Max:            38.95

--- Measures of Central Tendency ---
Mean:           20.73
Median (p50):   18.92
Mode:           15.05

--- Measures of Spread & Distribution ---
Std Deviation:  7.4605
Variance:       55.6597
Quartile 1 (p25): 15.735
Quartile 3 (p75): 21.765
Percentile (p95): 36.801
Percentile (p99): 38.5202
IQR:            6.03
Skewness:       1.6862 (Highly Right Skewed)
Outliers:       [35.88 38.95]
```

## Understanding the Output

| Statistic         | Description                                                                                                                                                                |
| :---------------- |:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Count**         | The total number of valid numeric entries processed.                                                                                                                       |
| **Min**           | The smallest number in the dataset.                                                                                                                                        |
| **Max**           | The largest number in the dataset.                                                                                                                                         |
| **Mean**          | The "average" value. Highly sensitive to outliers.                                                                                                                         |
| **Median (p50)**  | The middle value of the sorted dataset. Represents the "typical" value and is robust against outliers.                                                                     |
| **Mode**          | The number(s) that occur most frequently. If no number repeats, the mode is "None".                                                                                        |
| **Std Deviation** | Measures how spread out the numbers are from the mean. A low value indicates data is clustered tightly; a high value indicates data is spread out.                         |
| **Variance**      | The square of the standard deviation.                                                                                                                                      |
| **Quartile 1 (p25)** | The value below which 25% of the data falls.                                                                                                                            |
| **Quartile 3 (p75)** | The value below which 75% of the data falls.                                                                                                                            |
| **Percentile (p95)** | The value below which 95% of the data falls. Useful for understanding the upper tail of the distribution.                                                              |
| **Percentile (p99)** | The value below which 99% of the data falls. Useful for identifying extreme values and tail behavior.                                                                   |
| **IQR**           | The Interquartile Range (`Q3 - Q1`). It represents the middle 50% of the data and is a robust measure of spread.                                                           |
| **Skewness**      | A measure of asymmetry. A value near 0 is symmetrical. A positive value indicates a "right skew" (a long tail of high values). A negative value indicates a "left skew".   |
| **Outliers**      | Values that fall outside the range of `Q1 - 1.5*IQR` and `Q3 + 1.5*IQR`. These are statistically unusual data points.                                                      |

## Testing and Correctness

The program includes two layers of verification:

### Unit Tests (`stats_test.go`)

Standard Go unit tests cover the core statistical functions:

- `computeStats` - verifies all computed statistics against a 31-number dataset
- `calculatePercentile` - tests percentile interpolation at various points (p0, p25, p50, p75, p100)
- `calculateSkewness` - validates skewness calculations for symmetric and skewed distributions

Run the tests with:
```bash
go test -v
```

### Independent Verification (`verify_stats.sh`)

A shell script independently calculates statistics using `bc` (arbitrary precision calculator) and compares the results against the program's output. This provides external validation that the Go implementation produces correct results.

The script was developed and tested on `MacOS Sequoia 15.7.3` using:
- `bc` - arbitrary precision calculator for sum, mean, variance, standard deviation, and percentile calculations
- `sort` - for ordering the dataset to verify percentile indices

Run the verification with:
```bash
./verify_stats.sh
```

The script exits with code 0 if all values match, or code 1 if any discrepancies are found.

### Test Data Characteristics

The test dataset consists of 31 numbers designed to exercise common scenarios:
- A mix of integers, decimals, and numbers with trailing zeros (e.g., `25.00`, `35.0`)
- Repeated values to produce a defined mode
- An outlier value to verify outlier detection

The tests focus on typical usage patterns and do not cover exotic edge cases, extreme values, or adversarial inputs. Users requiring high-assurance results for critical applications should perform additional validation appropriate to their use case.

## Disclosure Notification

This program is my own original idea and was completely developed
on my own personal time, for my own personal benefit, and on my
personally owned equipment.

Commit message:

Add testing reference to Disclaimer

README.md, after:

# Go Stats Calculator

A robust, command-line tool written in Go to compute a comprehensive set of descriptive statistics from a list of numbers. It can read data from a file or directly from standard input, making it a flexible utility for data analysis in any shell environment.

## Overview

This program takes a simple, newline-delimited list of numbers (integers or floats) and calculates key statistical properties, including measures of central tendency (mean, median, mode), measures of spread (standard deviation, variance, IQR), and the shape of the distribution (skewness). It also identifies outliers based on the interquartile range method.

## Disclaimer

This program was vibe-coded by `Gemini 2.5` Pro and `Opus 4.5`. As such, the author can't be held responsible for incorrect calculations. Please verify the results for any critical applications. That said, it has been validated through unit tests and independent verification. See [Testing and Correctness](#testing-and-correctness) for details.

## Features

The calculator computes the following statistics:

-   **Count**: Total number of valid data points.
-   **Min / Max**: The minimum and maximum values in the dataset.
-   **Mean**: The arithmetic average.
-   **Median (p50)**: The 50th percentile, or the middle value of the dataset.
-   **Mode**: The value(s) that appear most frequently.
-   **Standard Deviation**: A measure of the amount of variation or dispersion.
-   **Variance**: The square of the standard deviation.
-   **Quartiles (Q1, Q3)**: The 25th (p25) and 75th (p75) percentiles.
-   **Percentiles (p95, p99)**: The 95th and 99th percentiles, useful for understanding tail distributions.
-   **Interquartile Range (IQR)**: The range between the first and third quartiles (Q3 - Q1).
-   **Skewness**: A formal measure of the asymmetry of the data distribution.
-   **Outliers**: Data points identified as abnormally distant from other values.

All numeric output uses full decimal notation (no scientific notation) with trailing zeros trimmed for readability.

## Installation

### Homebrew (MacOS / Linux):

* `brew tap jftuga/homebrew-tap; brew update; brew install jftuga/tap/stats`

### Source

* Clone the repository and build:
    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/jftuga/go-stats-calculator.git
    cd go-stats-calculator
    go build -ldflags="-s -w" -o stats stats.go
    ```

## Usage

The program can be run in two ways: by providing a filename as a command-line argument or by piping data into it. The program automatically detects piped input, so the `-` argument is optional.

### 1. Read from a File

Provide the path to a file containing numbers, one per line.

**Syntax:**
```bash
./stats <filename>
```

**Example:**
```bash
./stats data.txt
```

### 2. Read from Standard Input (stdin)

Pipe data from other commands directly into the program. The program automatically detects piped input, so no special argument is needed. You can optionally use the `-` argument for explicit stdin reading.

**Syntax:**
```bash
<command> | ./stats
```

**Examples:**
```bash
# Pipe the contents of a file
cat data.txt | ./stats

# Pipe output from another command (e.g., extracting a column from a CSV)
awk -F',' '{print $3}' metrics.csv | ./stats

# Explicit stdin reading (also works)
cat data.txt | ./stats -

# Manually enter numbers (press Ctrl+D when finished)
./stats -
10
20
30
^D
```

## Example

Given a file named `sample_data.txt` with the following content:

**`sample_data.txt`**
```
14.52
16.81
13.99
15.05
17.33
21.40
15.05
18.92
24.78
19.61
38.95
22.13
16.42
35.88
20.11
```

Running the command `./stats sample_data.txt` will produce the following output:

```
--- Descriptive Statistics ---
Count:          15
Sum:            310.95
Min:            13.99
Max:            38.95

--- Measures of Central Tendency ---
Mean:           20.73
Median (p50):   18.92
Mode:           15.05

--- Measures of Spread & Distribution ---
Std Deviation:  7.4605
Variance:       55.6597
Quartile 1 (p25): 15.735
Quartile 3 (p75): 21.765
Percentile (p95): 36.801
Percentile (p99): 38.5202
IQR:            6.03
Skewness:       1.6862 (Highly Right Skewed)
Outliers:       [35.88 38.95]
```

## Understanding the Output

| Statistic         | Description                                                                                                                                                                |
| :---------------- |:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Count**         | The total number of valid numeric entries processed.                                                                                                                       |
| **Min**           | The smallest number in the dataset.                                                                                                                                        |
| **Max**           | The largest number in the dataset.                                                                                                                                         |
| **Mean**          | The "average" value. Highly sensitive to outliers.                                                                                                                         |
| **Median (p50)**  | The middle value of the sorted dataset. Represents the "typical" value and is robust against outliers.                                                                     |
| **Mode**          | The number(s) that occur most frequently. If no number repeats, the mode is "None".                                                                                        |
| **Std Deviation** | Measures how spread out the numbers are from the mean. A low value indicates data is clustered tightly; a high value indicates data is spread out.                         |
| **Variance**      | The square of the standard deviation.                                                                                                                                      |
| **Quartile 1 (p25)** | The value below which 25% of the data falls.                                                                                                                            |
| **Quartile 3 (p75)** | The value below which 75% of the data falls.                                                                                                                            |
| **Percentile (p95)** | The value below which 95% of the data falls. Useful for understanding the upper tail of the distribution.                                                              |
| **Percentile (p99)** | The value below which 99% of the data falls. Useful for identifying extreme values and tail behavior.                                                                   |
| **IQR**           | The Interquartile Range (`Q3 - Q1`). It represents the middle 50% of the data and is a robust measure of spread.                                                           |
| **Skewness**      | A measure of asymmetry. A value near 0 is symmetrical. A positive value indicates a "right skew" (a long tail of high values). A negative value indicates a "left skew".   |
| **Outliers**      | Values that fall outside the range of `Q1 - 1.5*IQR` and `Q3 + 1.5*IQR`. These are statistically unusual data points.                                                      |

## Testing and Correctness

The program includes two layers of verification:

### Unit Tests (`stats_test.go`)

Standard Go unit tests cover the core statistical functions:

- `computeStats` - verifies all computed statistics against a 31-number dataset
- `calculatePercentile` - tests percentile interpolation at various points (p0, p25, p50, p75, p100)
- `calculateSkewness` - validates skewness calculations for symmetric and skewed distributions

Run the tests with:
```bash
go test -v
```

### Independent Verification (`verify_stats.sh`)

A shell script independently calculates statistics using `bc` (arbitrary precision calculator) and compares the results against the program's output. This provides external validation that the Go implementation produces correct results.

The script was developed and tested on `MacOS Sequoia 15.7.3` using:
- `bc` - arbitrary precision calculator for sum, mean, variance, standard deviation, and percentile calculations
- `sort` - for ordering the dataset to verify percentile indices

Run the verification with:
```bash
./verify_stats.sh
```

The script exits with code 0 if all values match, or code 1 if any discrepancies are found.

### Test Data Characteristics

The test dataset consists of 31 numbers designed to exercise common scenarios:
- A mix of integers, decimals, and numbers with trailing zeros (e.g., `25.00`, `35.0`)
- Repeated values to produce a defined mode
- An outlier value to verify outlier detection

The tests focus on typical usage patterns and do not cover exotic edge cases, extreme values, or adversarial inputs. Users requiring high-assurance results for critical applications should perform additional validation appropriate to their use case.

## Disclosure Notification

This program is my own original idea and was completely developed
on my own personal time, for my own personal benefit, and on my
personally owned equipment.
